---
title: JAMStack won't stop shooting itself in the foot
meta_img: ''
tags:
- JAMstack
footer-cta:
  title: ''
  text: ''

---
Forestry.io, the CMS I use for this site and many of my clients, just announced their end of life for March 22, 2023. Although they are providing a new and improved CMS, Tina CMS this will inevitably cause issues for my clients and former places of work since they are not developers. And therein lies the core issue with JAMstack: it's constantly evolving and only level 9000 developers that work at companies with robust engineering departments can keep up. 

I started developing on Jekyll with my help of my co-workers while I was working at DNC because we needed a solution to quickly build static sites with CMS. There weren't any CMS available at the time so our backend engineer spun up something to make Jekyll-Admin, a local only CMS, so that members of the digital team could make edits on the fly and save me changing a heading, changing it back to the original, and then changing it back to the first edit. It was revolutionary at the time because you didn't have to create these complex CI/CD systems with encrypted databases that could, and did, crash sites. All content edits were version controlled and if an edit caused a build to fail, the site would remain up. On top of the conveniences of version controlled content, the sites were virtually un-hackable, fast loading, and didn't require pesky maintenance like updating core-versions and dependent plugins. 

New CMSs came out and I settled on Forestry.io for it's excellent UI for content editing and configuration. I ran many sites on it from my start up to agency to freelance work. The lack of maintenance meant I could focus on optimizations on the already fast and optimized sites. Then the frameworks started rolling in with their subsequent CMSs. All had pros and cons, but I stuck with my trusty Jekyll since it was created by Github and Foresty since it was still a category leader, in my mind at least, and one of the founders was a GitHub employee. Then tragedy struck, [Frank](https://tina.io/blog/our-friend-frank-taillandier/) the maintainer of both Forestry and GitHub pages (Jekyll's host), died suddenly. Although Jekyll is the [Toyota pickup](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xnWKz7Cthkk) of frameworks, in that it can run no matter what, there will be [no more updates](https://www.theregister.com/2021/09/14/future_of_jekyll_project_engine/) since the death of its maintainer. Not that it needs the updates, since it runs exactly how it's supposed to and there's no security vulnerabilities due to its static nature. If you're a client of mine reading down this far in a post about web frameworks, a) congrats fellow nerd and b) your site is safe since Github is still supporting it. 

The plethora of frameworks and CMSs that have emerged in recent years offer some improvements over Jekyll and Forestry so I decided to settle on Gatsby for a recent project. Gatsby is react-based which meant I could learn the popular, Facebook created  framework that is used by all the big dogs in web development. Though it was initially difficult to start, I got the hang of it very quickly and considered adopting it for my next stack. It worked with Forestry.io too so I could still use a markdown editor on Gatsby pages, until I discovered some issues with nested content. No worries, Gatsby has tons of plugins to fix those issues...that had not been updated in over a year because now all alpha code monkeys preferred Next.js. Oy! Gatsby's core is still actively maintained and it's still popular enough so I just needed to find a new CMS. Learning from my Gatsby mistake, I did some very thoughtful research and settled upon Sanity, an API-based CMS that's version controlled but I won't be able to see breaking changes in the code. Fortunately I can see the breaking changes on deploy and they won't crash the site so we haven't circled back to creating Wordpress 2.0, yet. 

Now if you're a non-technical person reading this, you will have no idea what all of these words mean except for Wordpress. Wordpress is what all these JAMstack frameworks are trying and succeeding to improve upon, but it's still 65% of the marketshare and all the JAMstack frameworks combined maybe get to 2%. [As I've written before](https://edcupaioli.com/blog/upgrade-your-wordpress-site-with-jekyll/), Wordpress is slow, not secure, requires constant maintenance, and, despite the prevalence of drag and drop editors and plugins, difficult to develop. But the consumer doesn't know that. They just know Wordpress lets you edit content and they heard of it. Since I worked on marketing teams, I know a familiarity heuristic is not a steep advantage to adoption of another superior product. The issue is 